---
id: 1865
title: Testing Watson Analytics
date: 2016-12-19T12:27:31-05:00
author: Alan Verdugo
layout: revision
guid: http://www.kippel.net/blog/?p=1865
permalink: /?p=1865
---
<p style="text-align: justify;">
      I am not a data scientist (yet) but it is obvious that analytics will become an even more important part of every single business in the near future. Due to my interest in learning data science, I started playing with IBM&#8217;s new toy: <a href="https://watson.analytics.ibmcloud.com/product" target="_blank">Watson Analytics</a>. After seeing a few demos about it, I realized I had to test it somehow because, to be honest, it looked too good to be true. Luckily, we do not need to buy an expensive license or install anything to test it. There is a free, easy and fast way to do so. We just need to go to the <a href="https://watson.analytics.ibmcloud.com/pricing?ajs_aid=bcc728f9-21a6-4f2c-9b99-f6ef8a548a60&cm_sp=WAMicrosite-_-Organic-_-Organic-_-Organic" target="_blank">official page</a> and click on the &#8220;Ty it now&#8221; button, which will eventually grant us access to the free version. There is also a &#8220;plus&#8221; version ($30 dlls per month), and a &#8220;professional&#8221; version ($80 dlls per month), which, I think, are still quite affordable.
</p>

<p style="text-align: justify;">
      Once I created my test account and requested my free trial, I needed data. There are a lot of free data sets in the wild, but most of them were either <a href="https://vincentarelbundock.github.io/Rdatasets/datasets.html" target="_blank">too small</a>, <a href="https://aws.amazon.com/datasets/" target="_blank">too big</a>, too boring, or too confusing for me to make sense of the data and discover interesting patterns in it and still be able to use with my free version.
</p>

<p style="text-align: justify;">
      I spent some time looking for a good data set that I could use and finally I found <a href="https://fairmodel.econ.yale.edu/rayfair/pdf/1978A200.PDF" target="_blank">a paper from Yale&#8217;s Journal of Political Economy about extramarital affairs</a>. The <a href="https://vincentarelbundock.github.io/Rdatasets/csv/COUNT/affairs.csv" target="_blank">data set</a> that was used to write this paper was generated by a survey in Psychology Today in 1969. It included only 601 records, so it does not offer enough data to make any serious or definitive conclusion (and this is something Yale&#8217;s paper mentions several times), but I choose it because the insights that would generate would be easy to understand by anybody (most data sets I found required advanced knowledge in one or two sciences and/or an insane amount of expertise in matters of sports statistics).
</p>

<p style="text-align: justify;">
      After I uploaded the CSV file, Watson Analytics assigns a score to the quality of the data in it. I am still not sure of how that is calculated, but the score I got for this data set was 82 out of 100, so I was satisfied, after all, I just wanted to do a quick test run.
</p>

<p style="text-align: justify;">
      The cognitive part of Watson Analytics (it is not not branded &#8220;Watson&#8221; only as a publicity stunt) comes from the natural language sentences we can use while asking questions about the data. Watson will try to make sense of our questions and try to show us graphs that could answer the question satisfactorily. It also offers suggestions about how we can explore the data. This is the plus that Watson offers compared to other software for data analysis.
</p>

<p style="text-align: justify;">
      Now let&#8217;s go to the good stuff and analyze the data. The file has 10 comma-separated fields. According to the <a href="https://vincentarelbundock.github.io/Rdatasets/doc/Ecdat/Fair.html" target="_blank">brief documentation</a> I found for the file, this is the meaning of each field:
</p>

<p style="text-align: justify;">
  <strong>sex:</strong> A factor with levels (male,female).
</p>

<p style="text-align: justify;">
  <strong>age:</strong> Age.
</p>

<p style="text-align: justify;">
  <strong>ym:</strong> Number of years married.
</p>

<p style="text-align: justify;">
  <strong>child:</strong> Children ? a factor.
</p>

<p style="text-align: justify;">
  <strong>religious:</strong> How religious, from 1 (anti) to 5 (very).
</p>

<p style="text-align: justify;">
  <strong>education:</strong> Education.
</p>

<p style="text-align: justify;">
  <strong>occupation:</strong> Occupation, from 1 to 7, according to hollingshead classification (reverse numbering).
</p>

<p style="text-align: justify;">
  <strong>rate:</strong> Self rating of marriage, from 1 (very unhappy) to 5 (very happy).
</p>

<p style="text-align: justify;">
  <strong>nbaffairs:</strong> Number of affairs in past year.
</p>

<p style="text-align: justify;">
      A couple of notes here: I am a little disappointed of the &#8220;child&#8221; field. It is boolean when I would say that the number of children in the marriage would be a much more interesting number. The opposite occurs in the &#8220;religious&#8221; field: we are given a range of 1 to 5 according to how religious the person is, which is much more useful than simply a boolean value.
</p>

<p style="text-align: justify;">
      There are the first 10 records of the file, including the header:
</p>

<p style="text-align: justify;">
  &#8220;&#8221;,&#8221;sex&#8221;,&#8221;age&#8221;,&#8221;ym&#8221;,&#8221;child&#8221;,&#8221;religious&#8221;,&#8221;education&#8221;,&#8221;occupation&#8221;,&#8221;rate&#8221;,&#8221;nbaffairs&#8221;<br /> &#8220;1&#8221;,&#8221;male&#8221;,37,10,&#8221;no&#8221;,3,18,7,4,0<br /> &#8220;2&#8221;,&#8221;female&#8221;,27,4,&#8221;no&#8221;,4,14,6,4,0<br /> &#8220;3&#8221;,&#8221;female&#8221;,32,15,&#8221;yes&#8221;,1,12,1,4,0<br /> &#8220;4&#8221;,&#8221;male&#8221;,57,15,&#8221;yes&#8221;,5,18,6,5,0<br /> &#8220;5&#8221;,&#8221;male&#8221;,22,0.75,&#8221;no&#8221;,2,17,6,3,0<br /> &#8220;6&#8221;,&#8221;female&#8221;,32,1.5,&#8221;no&#8221;,2,17,5,5,0<br /> &#8220;7&#8221;,&#8221;female&#8221;,22,0.75,&#8221;no&#8221;,2,12,1,3,0<br /> &#8220;8&#8221;,&#8221;male&#8221;,57,15,&#8221;yes&#8221;,2,14,4,4,0<br /> &#8220;9&#8221;,&#8221;female&#8221;,32,15,&#8221;yes&#8221;,4,16,1,2,0
</p>

<p style="text-align: justify;">
      Watson Analytics allow us to create graph and insights extremely quickly. For example, let&#8217;s see what is the relationship of the number of affairs in the last year in marriages with children and in those without children:
</p>

<p style="text-align: justify;">
      The average number of affairs divided by sex shows that men are slightly more likely to indulge in paramour.
</p>

<p style="text-align: justify;">
      By age, we can see that young people are much more likely to have an affair, then it decreases and starts increasing steadily, until it starts declining again around age 42.
</p>

<p style="text-align: justify;">
     The rate of the marriage (how satisfied people are with their marriage) shows a peak at 27, and it <em>literally</em> is all downhill from there.
</p>

<p style="text-align: justify;">
      This graph show that the more religious individuals are less likely to have affairs.
</p>

<p style="text-align: justify;">
      Conclusions: My lack of expertise in data science is the main obstacle here. However, Watson Analytics allowed me to handle the data quickly and easily. In fact, it was so quick and easy that I was actually worried about generating incorrect assumptions. The conclusions in Fair&#8217;s paper seem to be very similar to the patterns I detected, which should not be surprising since we both used the same data, but there are always ways to skew the results in incorrect ways. In other words, Watson Analytics could be used by somebody without actual knowledge in analytics to &#8220;find&#8221; incorrect patterns in the data and present them as actual patterns, which then would be used to create incorrect insights. However, we should not blame the tool for my lack of knowledge. Watson Analytics offers many more options and possibilities, which I did not cover in this article. The learning curve of the tool is not the problem, the problem is the learning curve of data science itself.
</p>

<p style="text-align: justify;">
      The quality of the data is also a huge factor. If we feed the tool with bad data, we will not get any interesting conclusions about it. This is a truth and has been known since the dawn of analytics and it applies to any method used for the analysis, but I wanted to mention it again due of the suspicious origin and the small size and creation date of the data set I used. Thankfully, the world has changed much since 1969. In terms of marriages and extramarital affairs this is to be particularly important. Important variables like the number of children in a marriage, the average age of the married people, the education, occupation and religious preferences all have changed considerably since 1969, and all these variables showed to have an effect in the number of extramarital affairs. We would need to have more recent data to offer an updated view of the world. <strong>Please do not take seriously any of the graphs or patterns I showed. They are not the results of a serious study on my part.</strong>
</p>

<p style="text-align: justify;">
      Overall, my first contact with Watson Analytics was a good experience and I look forward in learning to leverage all of its capabilities. I tried to find open source alternatives, but I did not find anything that I could use start using as quickly or as easily as Watson Analytics. Hopefully open source projects that draw ideas from IBM will appear soon enough.
</p>