---
id: 703
title: The things I learned from the startup world
date: 2014-12-24T17:45:37-05:00
author: Alan Verdugo
layout: revision
guid: http://www.kippel.net/blog/?p=703
permalink: /?p=703
---
<p style="text-align: justify;">
      Startups are full of software people that does not create software. I am not talking about designers or system administrators, I am talking about people that will not contribute <em>anything</em> to your project. Snake oil sellers whose only work consist on telling you what they like and what they don&#8217;t about your project, and this would be fine if they provided constructive criticism, or useful advise, but they don&#8217;t.
</p>

<p style="text-align: justify;">
      One of the members of my team suggested that our web page should not use any passwords for login. His idea was to just type your username and you could login and access your data freely. This username was the one you would share with other users in order for them to share with you. Do you see the problem here? This guy actually suggested to create a file repository where the users had no control whatsoever over who accessed their files. This would be like suggesting that our houses should not use any locks or keys and anybody should be able to enter anybody&#8217;s home as long as they knew where it is located. The best part about this was that our motto for the project was &#8220;The safest way to share&#8221;. This guy was (and still is) a director of entrepreneurship for the most prestigious school in the country. That tells you a lot about being careful about suggestions and advise, regardless of where they come from.
</p>

<p style="text-align: justify;">
      Startups are full of people that are too greedy. Yes, there are people that only want money out of your project. They do not really care if you can potentially create a new industry or literally change the world. At the end of the day, they are only doing this for money. This is a big problem in the startup world, because some of these people do not understand that it could take months, or even years for your project to become a financial success. I am not saying that money is evil, after all, financial success could be a good sign of a well-managed project. What I am saying is that money should be, and generally is, a by-product of the efforts put into a good idea. The team should focus on create a great product first, and only then they should focus on how to monetize it, and only if this is part of their plan. The opposite, chasing money first and then a good idea to back it up will simply not work. You must identify if you are working with people whose only goal is money, and get away from them fast. Look at it this way: If they only care about the money, they will try to satisfy that need in one way or another, so they may cheat, lie or literally steal from you. This could mean stealing your work, your own money, or your time. I worked with a guy who actually told me that his only goal in our project was to create a big enough company we could sell to a bigger company and then live from his part of the deal. This was an obvious sign that he did not care at all about our work. I know that there have been great projects that spawned even greater projects by selling that first &#8220;proto-company&#8221;, I know that many times, that first idea is just a stepping stone that provides the needed funds for more interesting challenges. But we need to realize that in these cases, the final goal was to develop a new idea, and not just amassing a fortune. Money is always a mean, not an end. You must get away from people that is trying to use the goal for getting the mean, because they are unable to see the big picture. The history books are not filled with stories about rich people, they are filled with people who dared to accomplish great things, using their previously acquired money, or not.
</p>

<p style="text-align: justify;">
      Startups are full of people that are not ambitious enough. They may care about the numbers in their checks, but they are unable to see beyond that and realize that they may be sitting in the next big idea that could change the world for the better. That is the difference between being ambitious and being greedy. An ambitious person will not stop when (or if) a financial success is achieved. A greedy person will stop as soon as his thirst for money has been quenched. Jonas Salk did not patent his polio vaccine, basically refusing billions or dollars. Salk was an ambitious person, he did not care about money, he cared about greatness. As a result, people tearfully celebrated the inevitable victory over one of the most feared diseases at the time. Salk was awarded prizes and became a celebrity overnight. He did not achieve richness thanks to his discovery, but achieved greatness, and made the world a better place. This is what startups should be aiming for. Having solely monetary goals is a mediocre.
</p>

<p style="text-align: justify;">
      In one of our meetings, the team leader of my startup project asked for advice in how to actually make the project profitable (the fact that we did not know that already was a red flag that I failed to notice. A good idea should be able to sell itself). I suggested to invite a marketer, or a finance person to the team, or at least have a quick chat with a person with that kind knowledge. His reply was, and I quote: &#8220;No, this should be easy, we can do it ourselves&#8221;, followed by absolute silence of the whole team. This was the moment when I noticed that my team leader was asking for our advice and not listening to it, I also noticed that he was not humble enough to ask for help in a field we did not understand completely. I pictured a marketers&#8217; meeting trying to start a web project and one of them suggesting &#8220;maybe we should contact a web developer for advice&#8221; and being ignored. You see the problem now. There is a reason why diversity in a team is important: Diversity of the members of the team brings diversity of knowledge. Every single member of the team (and specially the team leader) must be humble enough to acknowledge that he does not have all the answers.
</p>